All right.
Welcome back.
So in one of the previous lessons where I was going through many of the most common methods of the list
interface, I skipped over a few.
And one of them that I skipped over in particular was the salt method because I wanted to dedicate a
lesson just for that.
And so now we're going to dig into that and understand how we can use it.
So let me lay out a scenario, let's say that we want to be able to simply list out all of the employees
that we have contained in a collection, such as a list.
But we want to list them out in alphabetical order, perhaps.
OK, so we want to sort them in order.
How can we do that?
So first thing I want to do is let's just run the program to the point that it just prints out the employees
in the list as they currently are.
OK, so maybe the easiest way to do that would be to just uncomment these three lines here where we're
looping over all of the employees and we're calling the two string and printing them out.
So let's just select those.
And I'm just doing a command forward slash to uncomment, and then let's just run this.
Okay, so let's see here.
Make a little room here.
All right.
So these should be in the order in which they were listed in the text string itself.
Up here, I think these should all be the same order, the programmers.
This is the second one which results in this lambda thing and then two three four five four flintstone
and then rubble.
Yeah.
So I think we're in the same order here.
So one thing to keep in mind is that we've got Wilma Flintstone separated from Fred Flintstone.
We've got Barney rubble in between them.
OK, so if this were in alphabetical order in a natural alphabetical order where we'd alphabetized by
the last name first and then potentially the first name to be a tie breaker?
Right.
So clearly, this is not in a natural ordering as of now.
OK, so we've established that that's what that's doing at the moment.
OK, so we saw that there was a sort method on the list interface.
So let's take another look at that.
So if we were to simply reference our employees variable here, which is a list and we can see that
right there, it's a list employees dot sort.
So there's a sort method on this class.
So the question is, how can we use it?
Right?
So if we look here, we can see that the sorting method takes an input of something called a comparator.
So let me explain what that actually is.
Comparator is an interface, and it defines a method on it that allows us to compare any two objects.
OK.
So if we had an implementation of a comparator, that comparator would be able to compare in this case,
any two employees with each other to determine which one comes first or second, or if they are equal.
OK.
That's what a comparator will do.
And then what happens is this sort and method here will apply what is called a sorting algorithm to
that list, using our comparator to effectively figure out how can it sort all of the objects within
the list using this comparator?
OK.
So it will use whatever sorting technique which we call an algorithm in this case that it has been coded
for to compare all of these objects in a meaningful way.
In this particular case, as of Java 16, the sought method will use a sorting algorithm called a merge
sort.
Now there are actually several algorithms for sorting objects and data.
It'll be beyond the scope of this course for me to get into the details of that, and it's for the most
part, not really going to matter.
But just know there are actually a number of strategies, if you will, for how to sort things.
But I think as of Java version seven, if I'm not mistaken, Java's sorting method here is utilizing
the Merge sort.
All right.
So to use this first, we'll just finish that part up.
Now we need an implementation of comparator.
And I think for right now, the quickest way that we're going to get this list of employees sorted out
is to simply create our own class that implements the comparator interface.
Now, right now, this is the only place in all of our code where we're actually going to need that
implementation.
And so can you think of what might be one of the quickest ways for us to be able to quickly create an
implementation of a comparator interface?
Take a moment to think about it.
OK, so there are a few ways that we can do this.
I think what I'm going to start off with, though, is to show you the technique that we we've seen
before, which is to create an anonymous class of a competitor.
And I can do that by simply typing right inside of the parentheses here, new and then comparator.
Now, I don't even have to type.
I don't even have to finish typing because the ADP knows where I'm going with this.
As you can see here, it's showing me something here so I can just hit, enter and watch what happens.
It goes ahead and fills in the rest of the scaffolding for an anonymous class of type competitor.
And this computer is using a generic.
So it's saying that it knows how to compare specifically objects of type I employee.
OK, so that's kind of important.
And so within this comparator implementation, there is one method that comes from the comparator interface
called Compare.
This method takes two objects as input, and because we're using generics, it has gone ahead and set
the type two I employee, which is great if we did not use generics.
These would be of type object, which is very generic in the literal sense.
And then we'd have to cast these.
OK, so now the way that this compare method works on a comparator is it expects us to write code that
compares these two objects with each other and returns an integer, depending on our determination of
which one comes first or second.
Basically, what happens is if if zero one, if 01 should come before oh two, then we should return
a negative one.
If 02 should come before 01.
Then we should return a positive one.
And if they are both equal to each other, then we should return to zero.
OK.
So negative one, zero or positive one are the results that we should return.
Now, this can actually be done fairly easily for really, really simple scenarios, because a lot of
java's most common data types, strings and numbers, dates, things like that actually already have
a method on them which we can simply delegate down to to make the determination of what comes first
or second.
Let me show you what I mean.
Let's say that we for right now, we just want to compare the last names of these two objects to determine
which one comes first or second.
Right?
So we need to get at the last names.
So one problem we're going to run into right away, though, is the fact that the eye employee interface
doesn't know anything about names, right?
All it knows is the method get salary.
So we're we're going to want to probably cast these objects not just to an employee, but to employees
so that we can actually access the last name of each of these objects.
And we also have to be mindful, though, that there's going to be at least one object in our list that
isn't an actual employee.
Right?
This line right here is going to be converted into an object of Type II employee, but it won't be an
actual employee.
It will be made by our lambda expression.
And so this guy here won't actually convert to an object that has a name.
OK.
That's just the way we wrote the code.
So we need to be a little bit careful when we get to objects made in that way.
So what I'm thinking is maybe we'll start off with an if block here with an if block.
And we'll say something like if, oh, one instance of employee and oh two instance of employee, then
proceed to do some fancy stuff, right?
I think that might be kind of a good start.
Now we're also going to want to actually access the last name fields of 01 and 02.
And so even though we're checking if they are instances of employee, this variable and this variable
are still of type I employee.
So we'd want to cast these.
But now that we're using the instance of we can use, can you think of it?
We can use we can use pattern matching to save us a line of code where we would have had to cast these.
So let me just remind you real quick, what we might have done is to create new variables such as employee,
I don't know, empty one equals and then we'd cast employee oh, one, right?
And then we'd do that again for.
Four 02, right, we do something like that, and then we could access the last name field of this because
now it is a type employee which defines the last name, whereas I employee does not define their last
name.
Let me just prove that to you real quick.
So if I just reference one period, there's a get salary method here, but there is no last name.
Now I know you're seeing this here, but that's these this last name, first name, date of birth.
These are only showing up here because the I.D. is smart enough to to know that there is the possibility
that 01 not only is a type of type I employee, but it may also be of employee.
And if I reference this, watch what happens.
It actually just casts it all for us.
Right?
But it's a little convoluted looking.
OK, so.
So that's kind of like the ID is is doing a little trickery for us.
OK.
But the last thing Phil doesn't actually exist on the I employee interface itself.
The ID is just being like super smart.
OK.
So just wanted to prove that.
However, we don't need any of this, and what we can do instead is to simply use pattern matching because
we're using the instance of operator here so we can just go right behind the word employee right there
and then just create a variable name.
And since I'm already using this one here, that's as good a name as any.
So I'll just reference that just like that and then I can do the same thing over here MP too.
So not only are we asking, Hey, is oh one an instance of the employee?
We're really saying if one is an instance of employee, then go ahead and create a a variable of type
employee and and use that tool to recast 01 as an actual employee.
OK, and now we can refer to it by this new name.
MP one and and then we're saying, do it again over here.
And by the way, so this ampersand, this and this logical and that we're doing here is nice as well
because.
We really want to make sure that both of these are an employee, right?
If they're not both an employee, we can't really compare anything right.
They've got to both be employees, meaning they both have to have a last name in this particular case.
All right.
So now that we've got all of that, all we have to do is simply return a number.
And so what we can do is to say return employee one last name now.
Last name is a string.
And I was already mentioning that a number of common data types within Java already know how to compare
themselves to each other, and string is one of them.
And we simply can call the Compare two method, and it's right here, and we're going to learn more
about this shortly.
The reason that there is a compare to method on string and in a number of other classes is because all
of these classes that we can compare with each other implement another interface called comparable right,
they're able to be compared.
OK.
And the comparable interface declares a method called Compare two, and I'm relying on that fact.
So compared to and then we'll reference MP two and grab the last name from this guy.
And that's all we need to do.
And the compare to method itself returns an integer, so it's really meant to work with comparing things.
That's that's why it works out perfectly for us here.
OK.
So we're simply saying, Well, let's just compare the last name of the empty one to the last name of
the empty two.
If the last name of the empty one comes first, then it'll return a negative one.
If they are equal, then it'll return to zero.
And otherwise, it will return a positive one.
Now we need to also look at what we're doing down here.
If either of the two instances is not able to be cast as an employee, what do we want to do here?
Well, I think for now, let's just run this and see what we get.
I think will be OK simply to return a zero as the default consequence if this logic here doesn't work
out.
OK, so let's let's try that out and see.
And other than that, I think we're done with our first implementation of this comparator.
Now what should happen is that this sort of method doesn't actually return anything.
If I hover on it here, you'll see that this method is a void method.
So what it actually does is it tries to sort the elements in this list in place, right?
So and so the elements should simply just be in a different order within the existing list, which is
pretty convenient.
And it means that this code right here that iterate over them and prints them out doesn't need to change.
So let's run this and see if we see any difference.
All right.
So what do we have now?
We've got Fred Flintstone, then we've got this lambda thing here, which is still in the same position
that it was then up here.
And I think that makes sense for the most part because we basically opted it out of this sorting determination
here.
Write this code here.
It's not something that is an instance of an employee.
And so the code will end up just coming down here.
And I think the end result of that is that it just doesn't move.
OK, so maybe we want that.
Maybe we don't.
We can.
We can contemplate that a little bit more.
But for the most part, that makes sense.
Everything else, though Flintstone Flintstone two two three three four, four or five five then rubble.
Yeah.
And so that is different than what we originally had, where we had Fred and Wilma Flintstone separated
with Barney rubble in between them.
And now everything is completely ordered by the last name.
All right.
Now we could order by anything here.
Currently, we're ordering by last name, but we could order by date of birth, and that would be very
trivial to do, right?
We could simply change this to the.
Now, of course, we're not listing the dates of birth down here at this moment, so it wouldn't be
very clear what we're looking at, right?
So we could do something like that, but it wouldn't be printed here unless we were to come in and change
that, which I'm not inclined to do right now.
But I just wanted to show how easy it would be to sort by some other field.
Right now, what if we also wanted to make sure that if there was a match on the last name, that we
then proceed to the first name, which is how natural sorting order typically works, right?
We could do that too.
Now that will be slightly more involved.
But let's go ahead and do it just so you can see what that would look like.
So first thing I'll do is I'll put this back to the last name.
So what we probably want to do in that case is to say something like, OK, if the last names are not
zero, which means equal, if they're not equal, then just return whatever you got from this compare.
Right.
So it's either going to be negative one or one.
So you'd want to do if they're not equal, you'd want to do exactly what we're doing here, return whatever
comes out of this.
But if they are zero, then you need to do a second round of this.
But the second time you use the first name?
OK.
So a way that we could do that might be to first capture the result of this compared to method in a
variable.
So if I select all of this and then do an option, Command V. and I will call this L name result.
OK.
Then I can use maybe like a ternary operator, I could I could do an if invested, if I could do a ternary,
I think I'll just keep it a little bit more simple right now and just use a ternary so I can say something
like.
All right.
So if the L name result is not equal to zero, then question mark because this is a ternary operator,
right, that I'm using.
So if the L name result is not equal to zero, then just return whatever that result already was.
OK.
However, otherwise, and that's how I can kind of read this this colon in a ternary else or otherwise.
Let's do this again.
But using the first name so I could even just grab all of that, copy it, come down here, paste.
And now I will just select the last name here, and I'm going to do an option shift to select it again
over here, right?
So I'm selecting both of these at the same time, and then I can just replace them both with first name
just like that.
And then I can hit Escape to get out of that dual cursor business.
OK.
So if the last names are not equal, then just sort by last name.
But if the last names are equal, meaning you have a zero coming back from this compared to then sort
by first name.
Now I don't I don't think we're going to see any difference here in this particular case, because it
looks like they're already in order like we've got Fred Flintstone coming before Wilma.
Let's see.
We've got Barney coming before Betty.
Yeah, so I think in this case, we wouldn't see any difference, so I'll tell you what, let's use
the salary instead for our second criteria that way.
Yeah, that way we will see a difference, I think.
All right.
So now let me show you something here.
You might think we can just select these two, the first names here and then call get salary.
But I can't do that.
And the reason I can't do that is because they get salary method returns a primitive integer and because
that's primitive, primitive.
It's not an object.
And because it's not an object, we don't have a compare to method on it.
Right?
Primitives are not objects, therefore, they don't have methods.
Right.
We want a way, though, to compare this integer to this integer.
Well, luckily, there's an easy way for us to do this, and what we can do is we can use the wrapper.
In fact, there's two ways that we can do this that are kind of similar to each other.
We can simply use the wrapper class integer, OK.
However, the wrapper class integer actually gives us a method where we can do this without having to
modify a whole lot more on this code.
So what we can do is actually simply reference a static method on the integer wrapper class integer
dot compare.
And this method takes two numbers as input.
OK.
So if I do this compare and then I can just pass in the get salary from one employee one.
Comma and then the get salary of employee two.
And this method still returns the negative one, zero or positive one.
OK, so that's one way I could do this, or I could have wrapped both of these in an actual integer
and then called the compare to method of the integer class that way as well.
But but this is more straightforward, and I don't have to create an entire instance of an integer.
Instead, I just use a static method, which is more efficient in this case.
All right.
So now we're comparing by salary, so let's run this again and see what we get.
All right, so what do we have now?
Fred Flintstone at two point eight million.
Then Wilma at two point five.
At 2.5 six, then Flintstone, two at two point five.
OK, so that's a way that we could do a secondary level of sorting if we wanted to and if we wanted
to get even more fancy, you could go multiple levels deep.
In that case, though, you might not be using a ternary anymore because that would probably look a
little too complicated.
And you're probably just going to switch over to using a regular plain old if block with a lot of nested
if statements in it.
Right.
And then you could go as deep as you want it to go, though that code would also be a little difficult
to to to read, probably if you went to too deep with it, but you could certainly do that.
And then a couple of other things I will mention if you wanted to reverse the order, you could do that
pretty easily.
One way that you could do it is to simply reverse the objects that you're comparing.
So instead of one and then two, I start with two and amp one, and then let's run this again.
And now that should reverse the list.
All right, so one thing you'll notice, though, is that we've got this lambda guy here that's kind
of an oddball that's kind of messing everything else up.
And the reason for that is because this pair of objects, this one here and then this lambda are being
compared to each other, which is bypassing this bit here because they're not both instances of an employee.
And we're coming down here, ideally in a situation like this.
You really want to have all of your objects in the list being of the exact same type so that they can
proper properly be compared to each other.
So it would be more ideal, honestly to filter this guy out.
Now, in many implementations in Java, where we can compare objects in a collection if one of those
objects is determined not to be whatever the data type is that we care about, such as employee in this
case, then what would happen is that we would actually do what's called throwing an exception.
That's where we basically say, Hey, all bets are off.
You've just passed me an object that can't actually be properly compared to the other objects in this
list.
And therefore, I'm just going to give up and not even try.
OK.
That is that is actually a pretty standard behavior that is implemented within Java within other methods
of Java for doing things like sorting.
What I've done here is to actually attempt to be a little bit more forgiving.
But that actually causes more headaches, to be perfectly honest with you.
And so in real life, I probably would have actually just written something to filter this out before
I even started doing the comparisons.
OK.
So perhaps I might have created a new list, and to create that new list, I might have iterated over
the existing list and only copied in the items that are of instances of employee.
OK, now I'm not going to bother to do that exercise here because when we get deeper into lambdas,
you'll see that all of this could be done so much more simplistically, including the filtering as well.
And that is like the best way to handle this type of scenario going forward.
But just just be aware.
In fact, it's kind of good that we've got this little one off thing in here, just so you can see how
somewhat unpredictable things can be when you do have an object that cannot properly be compared to
all of the other objects in your list.
Okay, so this guy is kind of ruining it for what otherwise would have been a really great little sorting
implementation here.
OK, and then let's see.
There's maybe another little thing I want to show notice up here that this bit here that was kind of
filled in for us by the ADP.
This bit is in gray.
And whenever the ADP shows a bit of code that's in gray, what it's basically telling us is that that's
redundant or there's a different way to do that.
And so if we actually just put our cursor here and hover for a moment, look at what the ADP tells us.
Anonymous new comparator can be replaced with a lambda.
And if you'll recall, we did this over in the employee class, which I will jump into for a moment.
Right here, right?
We when I was teaching you how to do this before we got to this implementation where we just used a
lambda.
I actually created a new I employee just like that, right?
Same same basic pattern.
OK, I'm going to undo this right now, but I just wanted to show you that.
So anytime you have code that can return an implementation of an interface, and if that interface only
defines one method, which is to say that that interface is what we call functional, that just basically
means it's an interface that only defines one abstract method on it.
Then anonymous classes of that interface can be replaced with lambda expressions like this one.
OK.
So if we jump back over here so we can actually hover over that bit there and come down here and we
can actually let the ADA replace all of this with a lambda expression.
So let's just see for grins what that will look like.
All right.
So all it basically did was to remove the reference to the computer itself and the name of the method.
OK.
And basically it stripped everything away other than the body of the method.
So it just kind of condensed things a little bit for us.
OK, it's saying here's a method that takes two two inputs.
And then here's the body of what it actually does with those two inputs.
OK, so it's just a little more stripped down, if you will.
But other than that, it's the same thing.
So that's pretty cool.
And like I said, we're going to learn a lot more about lambdas and all kinds of cool things that we
can do in the paradigm of functional programming.
Real soon it's going to be very natural to jump into that after we've learned what we can do in general
with collections.
All right.
And so having said that, I think I'm going to wrap up this lesson, but we're going to look at more
ways that we can sort because this was just one of several.
OK, so I'll see you in the next one.